### What is statistical power?

The power of a statistical test is defined as 1 minus the Type II error probability. If you are not familiar with sampling, this definition is very complicated. An interpretation will probably help. Let's say we have a statistical power of 0.8, which means that we have a probability of 80% that we correctly reject the null hypothesis in case that there is no effect between X and Y. In applied research, you will often encounter a statistical power of 0.8, many researchers use this threshold as a convention to say that a test has sufficient statistical power.

Keeping all other aspects constant, we can learn from power analysis that larger samples have a with a higher statistical power, because a larger sample size helps to increase the precision to estimate X and Y. On the left side you can see the results of two power analysis and the plot clearly shows for both cases that the power increases with larger sample sizes.

However, the left plot shows two power analysis. In the first analysis we assume a *low* and the second a *medium* effect size. Feel free to adjust the plot to see what happens if you increase (decrease) the effect size. Anyway, in accordance with the idea that the distribution of two variables have a smaller or wider overlap (depending on the sample size), you may realize that a small sample is sufficient to detect a large effect. We need approximately 200 cases in case of a small effect, while the number of observation goes down if we expect a large effect. Thus, the number of observations that are needed for a sufficient statistical power declines with an increasing effect size.
